Add a guide on the upcoming data maps (#46)
neoforged/Documentation: docs/datamaps/index.md

A data map can be attached to both static, built-in, registries and dynamic data-driven datapack registries.

## Registration
A data map type should be statically created and then registered to the `RegisterDataMapTypesEvent` (which is fired on the mod event bus). The `DataMapType` can be created using a `DataMapType$Builder`, through `DataMapType#builder`.  

A simple `DataMapType` has two generic arguments: `T` (the values that are being attached) and `R` (the type of the registry the data map is for). A data map of `SomeObject`s that are attached to `Item`s can, as such, be represented as `DataMapType<SomeObject, Item>`.  

Data maps are serialized and deserialized using [Codecs](../datastorage/codecs.md).

Let's take the following record representing the data map value as an example:
```java
public record DropHealing(
        float amount, float chance
) {
    public static final Codec<DropHealing> CODEC = RecordCodecBuilder.create(in -> in.group(
            Codec.FLOAT.fieldOf("amount").forGetter(DropHealing::amount),
            Codec.floatRange(0, 1).fieldOf("chance").forGetter(DropHealing::chance)
    ).apply(in, DropHealing::new));
}
```

:::warning

> The value should be an *immutable* object, as otherwise weird behaviour can be caused if the object is attached to all values within a tag (since no copy is created).

Author: Yes. Changed it to `all entries within a tag` to make it more clear.

:::

For the purposes of this example, we will use this data map to heal players when they drop an item.  
The `DataMapType` can be created as such:
```java
public static final DataMapType<DropHealing, Item> DROP_HEALING = DataMapType.builder(
        new ResourceLocation("mymod:drop_healing"), Registries.ITEM, DropHealing.CODEC
).build();
```
and then registered to the `RegisterDataMapTypesEvent` using `RegisterDataMapTypesEvent#register`.

## Syncing
A synced data map will have its values synced to clients. A data map can be marked as synced using `DataMapType$Builder#synced(Codec<T> networkCodec, boolean mandatory)`.   
The values of the data map will then be synced using the `networkCodec`.  

> If the `mandatory` flag is set to `true`, clients that do not support the data map (including Vanilla clients) will not be able to connect to the server, nor vice-versa. A non-mandatory data map is, on the other side, optional, so it will not prevent any clients from joining.

Author: They aren't versioned, supporting simply means it is registered on the otherwise and has a non-null network codec.

> If the `mandatory` flag is set to `true`, clients that do not support the data map (including Vanilla clients) will not be able to connect to the server, nor vice-versa. A non-mandatory data map is, on the other side, optional, so it will not prevent any clients from joining.

Reviewer: Gotcha. Is there a way to prevent data maps from connecting if they differ in some capacity? Or is this more of a use a network if you need to version or just let it fail?

> If the `mandatory` flag is set to `true`, clients that do not support the data map (including Vanilla clients) will not be able to connect to the server, nor vice-versa. A non-mandatory data map is, on the other side, optional, so it will not prevent any clients from joining.

Author: There isn't, no, a dummy channel/versioned payload would be used for that. Optional/mandatory sync is just the bare-bones.

> If the `mandatory` flag is set to `true`, clients that do not support the data map (including Vanilla clients) will not be able to connect to the server, nor vice-versa. A non-mandatory data map is, on the other side, optional, so it will not prevent any clients from joining.

Reviewer: Cool.

## JSON Structure and location
Data maps are loaded from a JSON file located at `:mapNamespace/data_maps/:registryNamespace/:registryPath/:mapPath.json`.  
For more information, please [check out the dedicated page](./structure.md).

## Usage
As data maps can be used on any registry, they can be queried through `Holder`s, and not through the actual registry objects.  
You can query a data map value using `Holder#getData(DataMapType)`. If that object doesn't have a value attached, the method will return `null`.

:::note

> Only reference holders will return a value in that method. `Named` holders will **not**.  Generally, you will only encounter reference holders (which are returned by methods such as `Registry#wrapAsHolder`, `Registry#getHolder` or the different `builtInRegistryHolder` methods).

Author: I meant Direct holders, whoops

`AdvancedDataMapType` have one more generic besides `T` and `R`: `VR extends DataMapValueRemover<T, R>`. This additional generic allows you to datagen remove objects with increased type safety, but it can otherwise be ignored and treated as wilcard (`?`) for most use cases.

### Creation
You create an `AdvancedDataMapType` using `AdvancedDataMapType#builder`. Unlike the normal builder, the builder returned by that method will have two more methods (`merger` and `remover`), and it will return an `AdvancedDataMapType`.  

Registration methods remain the same.

### Mergers
An advanced data map can provide a `DataMapValueMerger` through `AdvancedDataMapType#merger`. This merger will be used to handle conflicts between data packs that attempt to attach a value to the same object.  
The merger will be given the two conflicting values, and their sources (as an `Either<TagKey<R>, ResourceKey<R>>` since values can be attached to all entries within a tag, not just individual entries), and is expected to return the value that will actually be attached.  

> Generally, mergers should simply merge the values, and should not perform "hard" overwrites unless necessary (i.e. if merging isn't possible). A value can be overwritten by specifying the object-level `replace` field, which will bypass the merger.

Author: Hmm? There are use cases for bypassing mergers, especially for collections. You may want to overwrite just a value because another pack adds an entry you don't like, while continuing to merge the others.

We provide some default mergers for merging lists, sets and maps in `DataMapValueMerger`.  

The default merger (`DataMapValueMerger#defaultMerger`) has the typical first come last serverd priority-based overwriting behaviour that you'd expect from normal data packs, where the newest value always wins.

### Removers
An advanced data map can provide a `DataMapValueRemover` through `AdvancedDataMapType#remover`. The remover will allow selective removals of data map values, effectively decomposition.  
While by default a datapack can only remove the whole object attached to a registry entry, with a remover it can remove just speciffic values from the attached object (i.e. just the entry with a given key in the case of a map, or the entry with a specific property in the case of a list).  

> The codec that is passed to the builder will decode removers that will then be given the value currently attached and its source, and is expected to create a new object that will have the properties requested by the `remove` object removed. Alternatively, an empty `Optional` will lead to the value being completely removed.  

Reviewer: I think I understand this sentence, but it reads so confusingly.

> An example of a remover that will remove a value with a specific key from a `Map`-based data map:

Reviewer: Can a data map only have one remover implementation?

Author: The use of a codec allows it to virtually have any implementation it wants, the generic represents the “common ancestor” between its implementations.

Reviewer: Gotcha.

# Data Maps

A registry data map contains data-driven, reloadable objects that can be attached to a registry object.  
This system allows more easily data-driving game behaviour, as they provide functionality such as syncing or conflict resolution, leading to a better and more configurable user experience.  

> You can think of tags as entry->boolean maps, while data maps are more flexible entry->object maps.

Reviewer: How is a tag an entry-> boolean? Or is entry the registry object in this case?

Author: Entry is the registry object, yes.

A data map can be attached to both static, built-in, registries and dynamic data-driven datapack registries.  

Data maps support reloading through the use of the `/reload` command or any other means that reload server resources.

## Registration
A data map type should be statically created and then registered to the `RegisterDataMapTypesEvent` (which is fired on the mod event bus). The `DataMapType` can be created using a `DataMapType$Builder`, through `DataMapType#builder`.  

> The builder provides a `syced` method which can be used to mark a data map as synced and have it sent to clients.  

Reviewer: `syced` is probably not right.

```java
public record DropHealing(
        float amount, float chance
) {
    public static final Codec<DropHealing> CODEC = RecordCodecBuilder.create(in -> in.group(
            Codec.FLOAT.fieldOf("amount").forGetter(DropHealing::amount),
            Codec.floatRange(0, 1).fieldOf("chance").forGetter(DropHealing::chance)
    ).apply(in, DropHealing::new));
}
```

:::warning
The value (`T`) should be an *immutable* object, as otherwise weird behaviour can be caused if the object is attached to all entries within a tag (since no copy is created).
:::

For the purposes of this example, we will use this data map to heal players when they drop an item.  
The `DataMapType` can be created as such:
```java
public static final DataMapType<Item, DropHealing> DROP_HEALING = DataMapType.builder(
        new ResourceLocation("mymod:drop_healing"), Registries.ITEM, DropHealing.CODEC
).build();
```
and then registered to the `RegisterDataMapTypesEvent` using `RegisterDataMapTypesEvent#register`.

## Syncing
A synced data map will have its values synced to clients. A data map can be marked as synced using `DataMapType$Builder#synced(Codec<T> networkCodec, boolean mandatory)`.   

> The values of the data map will then be synced using the `networkCodec`.  

Reviewer: Maybe we should have an info/important tag here saying that the network codec should only sync whatever values are needed on the client. If everything needs to be synced, use the default codec. While it is implied, it's better to state explicitly.

If the `mandatory` flag is set to `true`, clients that do not support the data map (including Vanilla clients) will not be able to connect to the server, nor vice-versa. A non-mandatory data map is, on the other side, optional, so it will not prevent any clients from joining.

## JSON Structure and location

> Data maps are loaded from a JSON file located at `:mapNamespace/data_maps/:registryNamespace/:registryPath/:mapPath.json`.  

Reviewer: I understand the parameters, but if you're going to talk about them here, they should also be defined here.

    final DropHealing value = stack.getItemHolder().getData(DROP_HEALING);
    // Since getData returns null if the item will not have a drop healing value attached, we guard against it being null
    if (value != null) {
        // And here we simply use the values
        if (event.getPlayer().level().getRandom().nextFloat() > value.chance()) {
            event.getPlayer().heal(value.amount());
        }
    }
}
```

## Advanced data maps
Advanced data maps are data maps which have added functionality. Namely, the ability of merging values and selectively removing them, through a remover. Implementing some form of merging and removers is highly recommended for data maps whose values are collection-likes (like `Map`s or `List`s).

`AdvancedDataMapType` have one more generic besides `T` and `R`: `VR extends DataMapValueRemover<R, T>`. This additional generic allows you to datagen remove objects with increased type safety.

### Creation
You create an `AdvancedDataMapType` using `AdvancedDataMapType#builder`. Unlike the normal builder, the builder returned by that method will have two more methods (`merger` and `remover`), and it will return an `AdvancedDataMapType`.  

> Registration methods remain the same.

Reviewer: Does this need to be a separate section? It seems like it flows logically from above.

### Mergers
An advanced data map can provide a `DataMapValueMerger` through `AdvancedDataMapType#merger`. This merger will be used to handle conflicts between data packs that attempt to attach a value to the same object.  

> The merger will be given the two conflicting values, and their sources (as an `Either<TagKey<R>, ResourceKey<R>>` since values can be attached to all entries within a tag, not just individual entries), and is expected to return the value that will actually be attached.  

Reviewer: Personally, I think a code example would be useful here since it would better get the point across.

We provide some default mergers for merging lists, sets and maps in `DataMapValueMerger`.  

The default merger (`DataMapValueMerger#defaultMerger`) has the typical behaviour you'd expect from normal data packs, where the newest value (which comes from the highest datapack) always wins.

### Removers
An advanced data map can provide a `DataMapValueRemover` through `AdvancedDataMapType#remover`. The remover will allow selective removals of data map values, effectively decomposition.  
While by default a datapack can only remove the whole object attached to a registry entry, with a remover it can remove just speciffic values from the attached object (i.e. just the entry with a given key in the case of a map, or the entry with a specific property in the case of a list).  

The codec that is passed to the builder will decode remover instances. These removers will then be given the value currently attached and its source, and are expected to create a new object to replace the old value.  

> Alternatively, an empty `Optional` will lead to the value being completely removed.  

Reviewer: So, I feel like I misunderstood this on first pass. When you say removing here, you mean removing data from the data map attached to the object. And then, an empty object removes the entire data map for that object?

Author: Yes, that's correct.

## Datagen
Data maps can be generated through `DataMapProvider`.  
You should extend that class, and then override the `generate` method to create your entries, similar to tag generation.

Considering the drop healing example from the start, we could generate some values as follows:
```java
public class DropHealingGen extends DataMapProvider {

    public DropHealingGen(PackOutput packOutput, CompletableFuture<HolderLookup.Provider> lookupProvider) {
        super(packOutput, lookupProvider);
    }

    @Override
    protected void gather() {
        // In the examples below, we do not need to forcibly replace any value as that's the default behaviour since a merger isn't provided, so the third parameter can be false.

        // If you were to provide a merger for your data map, then the third parameter will cause the old value to be overwritten if set to true, without invoking the merger
        builder(DROP_HEALING)
                // Always give entities that drop any item in the minecraft:fox_food tag 12 hearts
                .add(ItemTags.FOX_FOOD, new DropHealing(12, 1f), false)
                // Have a 10% chance of healing entities that drop an acacia boat by one point

>                 .add(Items.ACACIA_BOAT.builtInRegistryHolder(), new DropHealing(1, 0.1f), false);

Reviewer: How do soft dependencies work with data maps and how would they be datagenned assuming the mod is not present.

Author: There are overloads that accept raw resource location IDs if the registry entries aren't present.

# Data Maps

A registry data map contains data-driven, reloadable objects that can be attached to a registry object.  
This system allows more easily data-driving game behaviour, as they provide functionality such as syncing or conflict resolution, leading to a better and more configurable user experience.  

You can think of tags as registry object ➜ boolean maps, while data maps are more flexible registry object ➜ object maps.

A data map can be attached to both static, built-in, registries and dynamic data-driven datapack registries.  

Data maps support reloading through the use of the `/reload` command or any other means that reload server resources.

## Registration

> A data map type should be statically created and then registered to the `RegisterDataMapTypesEvent` (which is fired on the mod event bus). The `DataMapType` can be created using a `DataMapType$Builder`, through `DataMapType#builder`.  

Reviewer 2: Link to Events page.

:::

For the purposes of this example, we will use this data map to heal players when they drop an item.  
The `DataMapType` can be created as such:
```java
public static final DataMapType<Item, DropHealing> DROP_HEALING = DataMapType.builder(
        new ResourceLocation("mymod:drop_healing"), Registries.ITEM, DropHealing.CODEC
).build();
```
and then registered to the `RegisterDataMapTypesEvent` using `RegisterDataMapTypesEvent#register`.

## Syncing
A synced data map will have its values synced to clients. A data map can be marked as synced using `DataMapType$Builder#synced(Codec<T> networkCodec, boolean mandatory)`.   
The values of the data map will then be synced using the `networkCodec`.  
If the `mandatory` flag is set to `true`, clients that do not support the data map (including Vanilla clients) will not be able to connect to the server, nor vice-versa. A non-mandatory data map is, on the other side, optional, so it will not prevent any clients from joining.

:::tip
A separate network codec allows for packet sizes to be smaller, as you can choose what data to send, and in what format. Otherwise the default codec can be used.
:::

## JSON Structure and location

> Data maps are loaded from a JSON file located at `:mapNamespace/data_maps/:registryNamespace/:registryPath/:mapPath.json`, where:

Reviewer 2: I was very confused by this notation for a second, particularly by the colons. Just doing `mapNamespace/data_maps/registryNamespace/registryPath/mapPath.json` should suffice in my opinion.

- `mapNamespace` is the namespace of the ID of the data map
- `mapPath` is the path of the ID of the data map

> - `registryNamespace` is the namespace of the ID of the registry

Reviewer 3: For completeness sake (even though it is mentioned on the JSON structure page), this should mention that the registry namespace is only included if the registry is a non-vanilla one

:::note
Only reference holders will return a value in that method. `Direct` holders will **not**.  Generally, you will only encounter reference holders (which are returned by methods such as `Registry#wrapAsHolder`, `Registry#getHolder` or the different `builtInRegistryHolder` methods).
:::

To continue the example above, we can implement our intended behaviour as follows:
```java
public static void onItemDrop(final ItemTossEvent event) {
    final ItemStack stack = event.getEntity().getItem();
    // ItemStack has a getItemHolder method that will return a Holder<Item> which points to the item the stack is of
    //highlight-next-line
    final DropHealing value = stack.getItemHolder().getData(DROP_HEALING);
    // Since getData returns null if the item will not have a drop healing value attached, we guard against it being null
    if (value != null) {
        // And here we simply use the values
        if (event.getPlayer().level().getRandom().nextFloat() > value.chance()) {
            event.getPlayer().heal(value.amount());
        }
    }
}
```

## Advanced data maps

> Advanced data maps are data maps which have added functionality. Namely, the ability of merging values and selectively removing them, through a remover. Implementing some form of merging and removers is highly recommended for data maps whose values are collection-likes (like `Map`s or `List`s).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Advanced data maps are data maps which have additional functionality. Namely, the ability of merging values and selectively removing them, through a remover. Implementing some form of merging and removers is highly recommended for data maps whose values are collection-likes (like `Map`s or `List`s).
```

Generally, mergers should simply merge the values, and should not perform "hard" overwrites unless necessary (i.e. if merging isn't possible). If a pack wants to bypass the merger, it can do so by specifying the object-level `replace` field.  

Let's imagine a scenario where we have a data map that attaches integers to items:
```java
public class IntMerger implements DataMapValueMerger<Item, Integer> {
    @Override
    public Integer merge(Registry<Item> registry, Either<TagKey<Item>, ResourceKey<Item>> first, Integer firstValue, Either<TagKey<Item>, ResourceKey<Item>> second, Integer secondValue) {
        //highlight-next-line
        return firstValue + secondValue;
    }
}
```
The above merger will merge the values if two datapacks attach to the same object. So if the first pack attaches the value `12` to `minecraft:carrot`, and the second pack attaches the value `15` to `minecraft:carrot`, the final value will be `27`. However, if the second pack specifies the object-level `replace` field, the final value will be `15` as the merger won't be invoked.

> We provide some default mergers for merging lists, sets and maps in `DataMapValueMerger`.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NeoForge provides some default mergers for merging lists, sets and maps in `DataMapValueMerger`.  
```

> The default merger (`DataMapValueMerger#defaultMerger`) has the typical behaviour you'd expect from normal data packs, where the newest value (which comes from the highest datapack) always wins.

Reviewer 2: "wins" is a weird term here. I'd use something like "where the newest value ... overwrites all values in datapacks 'below' it"

        final Map<String, String> newMap = new HashMap<>(value);
        newMap.remove(key);
        return Optional.of(newMap);
    }
}
```

With the remover above in mind, we're attaching maps of string to string to items. Take the following data map JSON file:
```js
{
    "values": {
        //highlight-start
        "minecraft:carrot": {
            "somekey1": "value1",
            "somekey2": "value2"
        }
        //highlight-end
    }
}
```
That file will attach the map `[somekey1=value1, somekey2=value2]` to the `minecraft:carrot` item. Now, another datapack can come on top of it and remove just the value with the `somekey1` key, as such:
```js
{
    "remove": {
        // As the remover is decoded as a string, we can use a string as the value here. If it were decoded as an object, we would have needed to use an object.
        //highlight-next-line
        "minecraft:carrot": "somekey1"
    }
}
```
After the second datapack is read and applied, the new value attached to the `minecraft:carrot` item will be `[somekey2=value2]`.

## Datagen

> Data maps can be generated through `DataMapProvider`.  

Reviewer 2: Link to datagen article.
